y
h
p
r
u
M

 
.

A

 
.

F
 
r

/

D
C
D
C
©

 

Ebola virus disease 
– an introduction

2

Ebola virus diseaseEbola virus disease – an introduction
Brief description

Ebola virus disease (EVD) is a severe, often fatal illness in humans. EVD outbreaks have 
a case fatality rate of up to 90%. Ebola first appeared in 1976 in two simultaneous 
outbreaks, in Nzara, Sudan, and in Yambuku, Democratic Republic of Congo.1,2 The 
latter was in a village situated near the Ebola River, from which the disease takes its 
name.  It  has  not  been  reported  in  humans  in  the  Asia  Pacific  region  as  of  31  July 
2012. However, with global travel, it is possible that outbreaks in Africa could result 
in the spread of the virus to Asia.

There are different species of the Ebola virus. Of these, the Reston ebolavirus was 
first discovered in laboratories in Reston, Virginia, United States of America (USA) in 
1989  after  some  quarantined,  crab-eating  macaque  monkeys  originating  from  the 
Philippines became ill and died. In 2008, a virus identified in pigs was found to be 
very  similar  to  the  virus  identified  in  monkeys  imported  into  the  USA  for  research 
from the Philippines in 1989.3

In 2009, six people tested positive for Reston ebolavirus antibodies after contact 
with  sick  pigs  in  the  Philippines,  but  had  no  significant  symptoms.  The  threat  to 
human  health  is  likely  to  be  low  for  healthy  adults  but  is  unknown  for  all  other 
population groups. Therefore, the ebola reston virus is not as great a threat as the 
other ebolaviruses that are known to be highly pathogenic for humans. However, it 
is of public health concern in the Asia-Pacific region because, although very rare, it 
is a newly emerging disease in animals and humans.

Currently there is no vaccine or specific treatment for Ebola virus disease.

Geographical distribution 

EVD  outbreaks  occur  primarily  in  remote  villages  in  Central  and  West  Africa,  near 
tropical rainforests. The virus is transmitted to people from wild animals and spreads 
in the human population through human-to-human transmission. 

Since 2008, Reston ebolavirus has been detected during several outbreaks of a 
deadly  disease  in  pigs  in  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  and  in  Philippines,  but  no 
illness or death in humans from this species has been reported to date.2

Agent 

Ebolavirus belongs to the Filoviridae family (filovirus). Ebolavirus comprises 5 distinct 
species:

1.  Bundibugyo ebolavirus (BDBV)

2.  Zaire ebolavirus (EBOV)

3

Ebola virus disease3.  Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV)

4.  Reston ebolavirus (RESTV)

5.  Taï Forest (formerly Côte d’Ivoire ebolavirus)ebolavirus (TAFV) 

Four of the five subtypes occur in an animal host native to Africa. BDBV, EBOV, 
and SUDV have been associated with large EVD outbreaks in Africa, whereas RESTV 
and TAFV have not. Pathogenicity varies among Ebola viruses, from EBOV, which is 
highly lethal in humans, to RESTV, which causes disease in pigs and macaques but 
asymptomatically infects humans. 

Reservoir

Fruit  bats  of  the Pteropodidae  family  are  considered  to  be  the  natural  host  of  the 
Ebola  virus.  Although  non-human  primates  have  been  a  source  of  infection  for 
humans, they are not thought to be the reservoir but rather an accidental host like 
human beings. Since 1994, Ebola outbreaks from the EBOV and TAFV species have 
been observed in chimpanzees and gorillas. 

RESTV has caused severe EVD outbreaks in macaque monkeys (Macaca fascicularis) 
farmed in Philippines and detected in monkeys imported into the USA in 1989, 1990 
and 1996, and in monkeys imported to Italy from Philippines in 1992.

A recent study suggests that bats might be a reservoir for Ebola virus in Bangladesh. 
The study found antibodies against Zaire and Reston ebolaviruses circulating in 3.5% 
of the 276 bats scientists screened in Bangladesh.4 Detection of antibodies to Ebola 
virus infection in Indonesian orangotans suggests the existence of multiple species 
of  filoviruses  or  unknown  filovirus-related  viruses  in  Indonesia,  some  of  which  are 
serologically similar to African ebolaviruses.5

Human infection

Risk factors

Human  contact  with  infected  fruit  bats  or  monkeys/apes  and  the  consumption  of 
their raw meat leads to wild-life-to-human transmission of the virus.

Human-to-human  transmission  is  through  direct  or  close  contact  with  infected 
patients, and particularly through contact with blood and body fluids of an infected 
patient.

Health-care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Ebola are at 

risk if proper hospital infection control measures are not in place.

4

Ebola virus diseaseLaboratory personnel handling infected material without proper biosafety measures 

are also at risk.

Mode of transmission 

Ebola is introduced into the human population through close contact with the blood, 
secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected animals. In Africa, infection has 
been documented through the handling of infected chimpanzees, gorillas, fruit bats, 
monkeys, forest antelope and porcupines found ill or dead or in the rainforest. 

Ebola then spreads in the community through human-to-human transmission, with 
infection resulting from direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) 
with  the  blood,  secretions,  organs  or  other  bodily  fluids  of  infected  people,  and 
indirect contact with environments contaminated with such fluids. 

Burial  ceremonies  in  which  mourners  have  direct  contact  with  the  body  of  the 

deceased person can also play a role in the transmission of Ebola. 

Health-care  workers  have  frequently  been  infected  while  treating  patients  with 
suspected or confirmed EVD. This has occurred through close contact with patients 
when infection control precautions are not strictly practiced.

Among workers in contact with monkeys or pigs infected with Reston ebolavirus, 
several infections have been documented in people who were clinically asymptomatic. 
Thus,  RESTV  appears  less  capable  of  causing  disease  in  humans  than  other  Ebola 
species.

Clinical signs and symptoms

EVD is a severe acute viral illness often characterized by the sudden onset of fever, 
intense weakness, muscle pain, headache and sore throat. This is followed by vomiting, 
diarrhoea, rash, impaired kidney and liver function, and in some cases, both internal 
and external bleeding. Laboratory findings include low white blood cell and platelet 
counts and elevated liver enzymes.

People are infectious as long as their blood and secretions contain the virus. Men 
who have recovered from the disease can still transmit the virus through their semen 
for up to 7 weeks after recovery from illness.23

Incubation period: 2 to 21 days.

Treatment

Severely ill patients require intensive supportive care. Patients are frequently dehydrated 
and require oral rehydration with solutions containing electrolytes or intravenous fluids.

No licensed specific treatment is available for use in people or animals.

5

Ebola virus diseasePrevention and control 

There are no vaccines for humans or for animals.

In the absence of effective treatment and a human vaccine, raising awareness of 
the risk factors for Ebola infection and the protective measures individuals can take 
is the only way to reduce human infection and death. 

Transmission to health-care workers has been reported when appropriate infection 

control measures have not been observed. 

It is not always possible to identify patients with EBV early because initial symptoms 
may be non-specific. For this reason, it is important that health-care workers apply 
standard precautions consistently with all patients – regardless of their diagnosis – in 
all work practices at all times. These include basic hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, 
the use of personal protective equipment and safe injection practices.

Samples  taken  from  suspected  human  and  animal  Ebola  cases  for  laboratory 
diagnosis  should  be  handled  by  trained  staff  and  processed  in  suitably  equipped 
laboratories.

Individuals

 ■

Suspected animals should be handled with gloves and other appropriate protective 
clothing. 

 ■ Gloves and appropriate personal protective equipment should be worn when taking 

care of ill patients at home. 

 ■

Regular hand washing is required after visiting patients in hospital, as well as after 
taking care of patients at home.

Community
 ■ Communities affected by Ebola should inform the population about the nature of 
the disease and about outbreak containment measures, including burial of the dead. 

 ■

 ■

People who have died from Ebola should be promptly and safely buried.

In regions where RESTV has been reported in pigs: 

Routine cleaning and disinfection of pig or monkey farms (with sodium hypochlorite 
or other detergents) should be effective in inactivating the virus.

 ■ All  animal  products  (blood,  meat  and  milk)  should  be  thoroughly  cooked  before 

eating.

 ■

Educational public health messages should focus on reducing the risk of pig-to-human 
transmission as a result of unsafe animal husbandry and slaughtering practices, and 
unsafe consumption of fresh blood, raw milk or animal tissue.

6

Ebola virus diseaseReferences

(1) 

Isaacson,  M;  Sureau,  P;  Courteille,  G;  Pattyn,  SR;.  Clinical  Aspects  of  Ebola  Virus  Disease  at  the 
Ngaliema Hospital, Kinshasa, Zaire, 1976.

(2)  WHO.  Media  Centre.  Ebola  virus  disease.  Fact  sheet  N°103.    http://www.who.int/mediacentre/

factsheets/fs103/en/.

(3)  WHO Global Alert and Response. Ebola Reston in pigs and humans in the Philippines – update, www.

who.int/csr/don/2009_03_31/en/.

(4)  Olival  KJ,  Islam  A,  Yu  M,  Anthony  SJ,  Epstein  JH,  Khan  SA,  Khan  SU,  Crameri  G,  Wang  LF,  Lipkin 
WI,  Luby  SP,  Daszak  P.;  Ebola  virus  antibodies  in  fruit  bats,  Bangladesh.  Emerg  Infect  Dis.  2013 
Feb;19(2):270-3. doi: 10.3201/eid1902.120524.

(5) 

Nidom CA1, Nakayama E, Nidom RV, Alamudi MY, Daulay S, Dharmayanti IN, Dachlan YP, Amin M, 
Igarashi M, Miyamoto H, Yoshida R, Takada A. Serological evidence of Ebola virus infection in Indonesian 
orangutans. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40740. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040740. Epub 2012 Jul 18.

Weblinks with more information:

 –

http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs103/en/

 – www.who.int/csr/don/2009_03_31/en/

 – www.afro.who.int/en/clusters-a-programmes/dpc/epidemic-a-pandemic-alert-

and-response/outbreak-news/4140-ebola-virus-disease-west-africa-situation/

 – www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/

7

Ebola virus disease8

Ebola virus disease